----------------------------------------------------------------------
Report of the Referee -- DR13756/Jiang
----------------------------------------------------------------------

The paper is not in a state to be published. Although, the presented
results look interesting. The paper presents an application of boosted
decision trees (in particular xgboost) to generative modelling in the
context of conditional flow matching. The authors consider 4 (partly
well-known and well-studied) datasets from particle physics. This is
certainly an interesting approach, but not new from a machine learning
perspective. The authors refer to the relevant literature, in
particular their reference [47], and I am not aware of any application
of these methods to particle physics problems.

Section I introduces the machine learning aspects. The four datasets
are introduced in section III (A,B,C,D) and then studied in three
paragraphs in section IV (A,B,C). There are often general explanations
on the datasets given in the result section IV which would be more
appropriate a part section Sec. III.

The paper is often confusing as it presents a mixture of details
rather than focusing on the authors’ own contribution and the specific
way the datasets are used in the paper. There are several inaccurate
statements and missing references. At the end, the text misses more
and more detail. For example, Figure 8 is nowhere mentioned in the
text, neither are the data labels in this figure.

The most serious problem is that no errors are given in results tables
or plots and there is no discussion of limitations, e.g. related to
the limited size of the validation samples. This is not appropriate,
especially in a physics journal, and not state-of-the art.

For example, the JetNet30 dataset is a 30x3 dimensional, well-studied
problem where the quality of the surrogate model can be judged by how
well global quantities such as the mass are reproduced. There are
well-established standard metrics and methods to assess their
uncertainties and limitations, which are used in several publications.
Unfortunately, the authors miss this standard and derive a
low-dimensional set of 12 variables. Modelling these variables
independently (Fig. 1) is rather trivial and even the 1-by-1
correlation (Fig. 2) is not demanding.

At first glance, I had hoped that the work could be improved in a
normal review process, but there are so many issues that I do not
think this is the right way to go. I would suggest starting all over
again. The paper needs to describe the ML model in much more detail to
allow for a solid evaluation. Rather than presenting the results for 4
different datasets and just doing a visual inspection of the results,
a demonstration of how well this approach works on JetNet30 with the
established metrics would be valuable. In addition, the caloChallenge
results look promising. A standard approach to evaluating the quality
is how well a discriminator can distinguish true from false. This is
all missing.

In the following, I list a small selection of problems using reference
numbers as used in the paper:

Section I - Introduction

The introduction describes the state-of-the art in applying generative
models in particle physics in a concise and understandable way. The
introduction ends with the claim that the paper describes a new
framework called BUFF as also the title of the paper suggest.
(Unfortunately, the authors do not provide any code. Public code
repositories have become standard in the field and would make it much
easier to judge the quality of the work.)

“In this work, we used several techniques mentioned from the study
[47] to replace the traditional Neural Network backbone CFM with
Gradient Boosted Trees (GBT) [48, 49]. We named the framework Boosted
Decision Tree based Ultra-Fast Flow matching (BUFF) with the model
flowBDT.”

• It is unclear what is meant by “framework”. Is it a conceptual
framework or a codebase?

• What actual is the “model flowBDT” for which results are presented
in contrast to the “BUFF framework”?

• What are the differences compared to [47]?

• How is this implemented (torchcfm? Own code?)

“we used several techniques mentioned from the study [47]”

• It sounds as if the authors were simply inspired by [47]. I have the
impression that the paper simply copied the method and applied it to
HEP datasets. That would be fine, but then a title like ‘Applications
of BDT-based conditional flow matching to particle physics’ would be
more appropriate.

• If the authors have developed their own code base, this would have
to be described in much, much more detail.

Section II - IMPROVED UNDERSTANDING FOR TREE-BASED FLOW MATCHING

• It does not become clear what the improvement over [47] is.

“… Equation.4 and Equation.6 over a mini-batch. “

• Equation.6 does not exist

“Additionally, we adapt the setup for GBT to ’mimic’ batch training as
practiced in deep learning models. The data points are duplicated
repeatedly to approximate the expectation calculated over all possible
pairs between input and target sample”

• This follows the text in [47], 3.1 and following, is this the same
idea?

In general, you can have numerical (real or integer) and categorical
data. How do you handle these different cases? How do you handle
varying size of the input data (zero padding?)

Sec. III – DATASET

• DATASETS The datasets section shortly presents four datasets used in
particle physics for studies on generative ML: JetNet, caloChallenge,
a dataset which is claimed to be from [63], and a fourth one from
[66].

A, the paragraph on JetNet, starts “Around 200,000 events of JetNet
dataset [58] are simulated at leading order using Madgraph [59].”

• This sounds (probably unintended) as if the authors had created the
files.

B, the paragraph on caloChallenge, “The datasets use the GEANT4 [62]”

• This is true but the important point is that these is related to the
ATLAS detector. The correct references are given at [61]. You should
just copy those. “CaloChallenge dataset 1 contains photon shower
simulated by Geant4 with 368 voxels on 5 different calorimeter
layers.”

• Dataset 1 contains photons and pions. I assume you mean that you
restrict yourself to photons from dataset 1

C, Jet Datasets for Unfolding “The dataset used for unfolding task as
described in Section. IV C is from [63].”

• [63] is the Omnifold paper, there is no section IV C, I assume this
is https://zenodo.org/records/3548091#.XdbOvjJKhlo (?)

D, Schrödinger Bridge Refinement “The conditional input dataset GFlash
[66–68] approximates electron showers using a parameterized fast
simulation”

• GFlash is a traditional fast simulation program [67,68]

• The dataset is from [66] (?) and I assume it is
10.5281/zenodo.8275193.

Section IV. – TASKS The Tasks section presents results on the four
introduced datasets.

• ‘Results’ would be a more appropriate title

• You have 4 dataset sections but 3 result sections. This is strange.

A, End to end fast simulation

“The total number of 12 variables calculated from 3 subjets of
pseudo-jets by JetNet are considered, specifically, The transverse
momentum and mass of the jet pT, m, the N-subjetiness for exclusive
n-jet tau1, tau2, tau3, the N-subjetiness ratio tau21 = tau2 /tau1 ,
tau32 = tau3/tau2 , Energy splitting function defined by the splitting
scale for n-jet exclusive clustering d12, d23, nth order Energy
correlation function ecf2, ecf3 …”

• The approach to study this dataset has similarity to [13] which is
not quoted here.

• There are no references given for your N-subjetiness variables,
Energy correlation etc.

“Almost all the features sampled from the model give the impressive
performance on f-divergence metric (i.e. triangular discriminator [70,
71]).”

• f-divergence is the larger class. The triangular discrimination is a
f-divergency, but the terms are not identical.

• That this is an impressive performance cannot be claimed without
evaluating your uncertainties, e,g, by bootstrapping. In addition,
there is a lower limit on these metrics (comparing to itself) given by
the finite size of the validation sample.

• Such a form of evaluation is not state-of-the art. (Consider as an
example for a proper evaluation [58]. There the Wasserstein-1 metric
on the mass is given with error (as 0.5+-0.1) and truth (as 0.2+-0.1).
These numbers do not apply to your much simpler problem but meant as
an example for a proper discussion of such results.)

“We compare the correlation of generated sample with the original
ones. Correlation contour plots are estimated by the Gaussian kernel.
Representative correlations among four vector, substructure and energy
splitting functions (d1, d12, pT, tau3) are shown in Fig.2.”

• You generate tau1, tau2 and tau12. In addition, you can directly
calculate tau12 from the generated tau1 tau2. Comparing these two
values would probably a much stronger test than the simple visual
inspection.

B, Low level simulation for cells and jet constituents

• I am not able to really understand how you treat your data. You
could just give the shape of the input data.

C, Conditional generation “The public jet dataset with several MC
generator/tune pairs is used,…” You start in this paragraph
discussiong results before you define what you are doing.

• This is the dataset from III C? Fig.7

• vertical labels overlap with plot Fig.8

• What is shown here? Flow-OT, Flow-Diffu, These are nowhere mentioned
in the paper, neither is a Figure 8 mentioned in the text at all.

There are multiple grammatical errors which are clearly distracting.
The paper would strongly profit from proofreading by a native speaker
or even a free AI tool.
